##SUMMARY

The domestic dog has become increasingly useful as a comparative spontaneous cancer model to study genetic and environmental risk factors as well as for easing the transition between rodent and human clinical trials for novel cancer therapies. The many similarities between various cancer types affecting humans and dogs and the spontaneous development of these cancers in immune competent canine individuals living in a shared environment with us suggest a common aetiology. The shorter lifespan of dogs and the shorter time to relapse after cancer treatment allows data regarding efficacy, short and long term toxicity and side effects of novel cancer drugs to be generated in years rather than decades as in human clinical trials.

However, certain limitations need to be overcome to make full use of the dog model. Slightly different classification systems for common cancers limit translation of data and clinical outcome from dog to human. The canine genome and annotation, especially that of complex immune gene families, could be improved to allow a more careful and correct comparison with the human genome and immune response, a key factor in cancer development and treatment.

Using novel long-read sequencing techniques, we will generate a platinum CanFam4.0 genome and improved information of both gene and variant annotation for an old healthy female German shepherd. In addition, we will specifically focus on canine mammary tumors, lymphoma and osteosarcoma where improved models would benefit human studies, and the canine forms are diverse and only partly characterized. Since the molecular sub-classifications used in human cancers are not yet used for these canine cancers, we plan to characterize these tumor types in the dog population using several approaches to meet human standards. We will further set up a Scandinavian-wide veterinary oncology network for research collaboration, increased use of the dog as a model. We will perform repeated blood sampling from dogs with malignant mammary tumors to allow the study of tumor evolution and progression. All of this work will lay the groundwork to enable more useful and efficient future clinical trials.

##Relevance

The dog is an excellent, but underutilized, model for human cancers. While both genome-wide association studies, expression studies and tumor mutation analysis has been performed in dogs, a better understanding of the canine genome and immune gene content would allow a more accurate molecular comparison of canine and human cancers. This research aims to create a better genome assembly and gene and variant annotation, as well as a molecular comparison of canine mammary tumors, lymphoma and osteosarcoma to the human counterparts.

##Sequencing Activities:

Sequencing Platform at the SciLifeLab Genomics Platform at Uppsala University

The genome sequencing, tumor/normal exome sequencing and RNA-seq will all take place in the context of ongoing high throughput operations for large-scale sequencing at the SciLife Lab Genomic Platform. For close to a decade, the SciLifeLab Genomics platform has been performing genotyping and sequencing with state of the art technologies. They perform both production and basic analysis of genomic and genetic data. The platform offers all but one of the technologies to be used in this proposal. They perform BacBio, BioNano, Chromium, Illumina short read sequencing for tumor/normal and RNA-seq, which can readily accommodate the relatively modest scale of the proposed studies. These sequencing efforts will benefit from the economies of scale and management practices of our existing large-scale operation, meaning that almost all expenses incurred are incremental additions to existing expenses. The methods used to monitor and control cost, quality, and output reflect the practices of industrial operations management. Our approach to resource allocation for sequencing is as follows: The sequencing read cost is a comprehensive number including equipment, labor, reagent, and project management associated with sequencing, detection, and supporting informatics infrastructure. The cost model for each sequencing platform is detailed below. After that are details on the specific costs related to the sequencing activities of this proposal.

 ## Introduction to Application 

Enhancing the dog as a model for human cancers: from genome sequence towards clinical trials The domestic dog has become increasingly useful as a comparative spontaneous cancer model to study genetic and environmental risk factors as well as easing the transition between rodent and human clinical trials for cancer drug development. The many similarities between various cancer types affecting humans and dogs and the spontaneous development of these cancers in immune-competent canine individuals living in a shared environment with us suggest a common aetiology. The shorter lifespan of dogs and the shorter time to relapse after cancer treatment allows data regarding efficacy, short and long term toxicity and side effects of novel cancer drugs to be generated in years rather than decades as in human clinical trials. However, certain limitations need to be overcome to make full use of the dog model. Different classification systems for common cancers limit translation of data and clinical outcome from dog to human. The current canine genome and annotation impairs a careful and correct comparison with the human genome. 

 Using novel long-read sequencing techniques, we will generate a platinum CanFam4.0 genome, and describe variation in complex regions of the genome for 20 dogs, as well as generating an improved annotation of both coding and non-coding functional elements. In addition, we will specifically focus on breast cancer (which is more frequent in unspayed dogs in Scandinavia) where improved models would benefit human studies, and the canine forms are diverse and in need of a more comprehensive characterization. Since the molecular sub-classifications used in human cancers are not used for these canine cancers, we plan to characterize these canine tumor types molecularly to meet human standards. We will further set up a Scandinavian-wide veterinary oncology network for research collaboration, and for increased use of the dog as a model, and to facilitate and enable future clinical trials. 

 Specific Aim 1. CanFam4.0 - novel platinum canine genome and a catalog of germ-line copy number variation. While the first canine genome was sequenced and assembled 13 years ago, the regions coding for the canine major histocompatibility complex and other gene families have remained comparatively poorly characterized. We will generate a platinum quality genome assembly using a combination of PacBio and other techniques, which will lead to a more complete genome and higher accuracy in the dog DLA region of the genome, the canine T-cell receptor genes, as well as other key immune genes. Studying 20 dogs from ten different breeds using Chromium long-range sequencing we will characterize copy number variation in complex regions of the genome, allowing a reference displaying multiple alleles in specific genomic regions. 

 Specific Aim 2. Detailed gene and variant annotation of the CanFam4.0 assembly including immune genes. Using existing RNA-seq data and >500 existing Illumina whole genome sequence assemblies as well as the copy number variation data generated in aim 1, we will annotate CanFam4.0 and display it on the UCSC browser and TrackHub. To improve the understanding of non-coding regulatory features, lincRNAs and miRNAs, as well as elements constrained using 200 mammals will be included in the annotation of CanFam4.0. We will compare the data to the corresponding human and mouse regions to evaluate similarities and differences in individual genes as well as genomic structure and allele frequencies across dog breeds. Existing T/N data will be remapped to the new assembly to generate an expansive panel of normal variation, which will be available as a resource for all canine cancer studies. 

 Specific Aim 3. Define comparable molecular phenotypes for breast cancer and pilot longitudinal cellfree DNA sampling for tumor evolution analysis. Determining the specific tumor subtype is important for determining treatment strategies and prognosis. Several subtyping methodologies are routinely used for canine samples, but the classifications don’t completely match the human classifications, which are increasingly molecular in type. By comparing RNA-seq and whole exome/whole genome tumor/mutation data (60-80 pairs each for mammary tumors, lymphoma and osteosarcoma) to histology and human data, we will determine which canine molecular and histological subtypes best match human cancer subtypes. To allow for collection and frequent sampling from dogs with mammary tumors, we will build a network, the Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium, to allow for collaborative research involving multiple research laboratories. We will set up a pipeline where tumor samples from both purebred and mixed breed dogs can be collected and characterized molecularly to allow an increased use of dogs to inform human cancer studies. We will sample cfDNA from dogs with mammary tumors longitudinally to begin generating data aimed at understanding tumor evolution and disease progression. We will work to adopt the systems used for clinical trials in the US for use in Scandinavia. Over time, this consortium will expand from sample collection towards treatment outcome evaluation and eventually clinical trials. 

#Specific Aims 

## SIGNIFICANCE 

 The major goals of the NIH are to understand human disease, including cancers, and to translate basic biomedical research into clinical practice, thereby impacting global human health. Specifically, the NIH acknowledges the complementary need for excellent animal cancer models through “PAR-17-245: Research Projects to Enhance Applicability of Mammalian Models for Translational Research (R01)” aimed at ‘developing, characterizing or improving animal models of human cancer’. Here we present the dog as an outstanding model for multiple human cancers, and suggest improvements to facilitate the use of this model. 

 In recent years, the domestic dog, Canis lupus familiaris, has become an important model for a wide variety of human diseases including cancer [1-5] and other complex diseases [6-18]. Currently, there are hundreds of scientists studying the dog worldwide, and an increasing number of researchers studying human disease either utilize the dog model or collaborate with a laboratory that does. The European Commission has previously funded an FP-7 grant LUPA, a collaboration of 22 Institutions in 12 countries to take advantage of the canine model. While one of the biggest advantages of dogs is the breed structure which makes mapping predisposing risk factors relatively easy, the fact that dogs also share the human environment and receive high-quality health care makes them even better models for cancer. Still, looking at the number of canine cancer models cited at NCI versus canine models for other disease groups (i.e. cardiology and lung or neurology) the dog appears to not be fully utilized for human cancer. Indeed, the 2015 Institutes of Medicine Meeting identified the lack of a good canine cancer genome map as a major gap. Limiting factors include a lack of understanding of immune genes and immunotherapy targets across breeds, slow sample acquisition and enrollment of dogs in clinical trials, and unclear matching of canine cancer subtypes to human molecular subtypes. In this proposal, we address all of these issues aiming to make the dog a better model for human cancer with particular focus on three complex cancers: breast cancer, lymphoma, and osteosarcoma. In particular, we will generate a novel long-read assembly using an older healthy dog, as well as detailed long-range genomic variation data from 20 dogs from multiple breeds. We believe that this work will substantially improve the canine reference genome and thereby improve the use of the dog as a cancer model and facilitate better comparative clinical trials. 

 Breast cancer studies through mammary tumors Breast cancer is the most common cancer to affect women and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in women (Torre et al. 2015). Thanks to major improvement in treatment protocols and early disease screening around 80-85% of women affected by the disease in Western countries will be cured. Though the overall cure rate of breast cancer has increased over the last decades, so has the overall incidence. In the US alone it is estimated that over 40,000 women died from the disease in 2016 [19]. There are still challenges in terms of how to treat patients who don’t respond to the normal standard of care, which includes a combination of surgery, radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy and immunotherapy, and hence there is a need for new and more effective therapies [20]. In addition, some of the current treatment modalities harbor debilitating short- or long-term side effects, which make development of new therapies attractive. 

 In canines, mammary tumors are the most common type of neoplasia affecting non-neutered female dogs [21]. The low rate of spaying in Scandinavian countries allows us to collect and study mammary tumors. The tumors can be divided into subgroups mainly based on their histopathological features. Attempts to classify canine mammary tumors using similar classification system as in humans have not been successful as they have been based on immunohistochemistry using poorly validated antibodies or on expression data for a small panel of genes and individuals [22-25]. The utility of canine mammary tumors as a model for human breast cancer in clinical trials has therefore been limited. Still, the route to metastasis for canine mammary tumors is similar to human breast cancer. Infiltration of the local lymph node or distant metastasis to lung tissue, bone or brain makes the dog a good model for metastatic disease [22, 26]. Hence, dogs would provide a good model for human metastatic breast cancer if subtyping challenges could be overcome using molecular tools. 

 Lymphoma, a heterogeneous cancer in both species Lymphoma is the seventh leading cause of cancer deaths in the US [27] and the incidence has drastically increased in the past decades. Heterogeneity among patients and accessibility of biopsies are limiting factors in human lymphoma research. Detailed subtyping is important as it can affect prognosis and treatment choice. A similar heterogeneity is seen among dogs developing lymphoma, although subtype frequencies differ. 

 Among both humans and dogs, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) make up the majority of nonHodgkin’s lymphoma cases. Human DLBCL is classified into ABC and GCB subtypes based on gene expression. While similar subtypes have been suggested for canine DLBCL [4], additional studies are needed to confirm which canine lymphomas are good models for specific human subtypes. In addition, peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) is relatively rare in humans and has a poor prognosis. PTCL-NOS is considerably more common among dogs [28], for example in the boxer breed. Since murine transgenic or knock-out PTCL-NOS models vary in how well they recapitulate the human phenotype [29], a canine model with spontaneously occurring disease could greatly improve our understanding. Detailed matching of subtypes between the species will greatly inform the translation of canine clinical data to human research. The social and economic impact of lymphoma is high, both for dogs and humans. 

 Osteosarcoma, common in large dog breeds Human osteosarcoma is most common in teenagers and young adults. It is a relatively rare, but often deadly disease. In large dog breeds osteosarcoma is more prevalent than in other breeds, with close to 13% of Rottweilers getting osteosarcoma. Like in humans [30], male dogs are slightly more likely to acquire the disease compared to females [31], allowing evaluation of hormone-related factors. Human studies have pointed to a high rate of TP53 mutations and copy number abberations in human tumors. Still, human studies are limited by the rarity of the disease, and a good model system is needed. 

 Improved annotation of immune genes: opening the door for canine immunotherapy studies and a better understanding of predisposing factors Immunotherapy is based on the concept of helping the normal immune system’s ability to eliminate cancer cells. This can be done through triggering the immune system to produce cancer-specific T-cells, recognizing specific tumor antigen-MHC complexes. The human and murine MHC genomic regions have been extensively studied. In contrast, the canine MHC region is only crudely annotated. Since dogs spontaneously develop cancers that very well recapitulate human disease, they are an excellent emerging model for immunotherapy clinical trials and cancer vaccines. Improved understanding of the canine MHC region and other immune gene families including breed-specific differences would allow for improved use of immunotherapy clinical trials in dogs with cancer and interpretation of the data for human clinical studies. 

 Mutation-specific T-cell receptor gene therapy and adoptive T-cell therapy are other options for immunotherapy, and have been successfully used in the dog model [32]. To expand the possibility for such studies, we plan to generate a platinum PacBio+ CanFam4.0 assembly, where the genes encoding the four T-cell receptor subunits in different dog breeds will be clear, supplementing the data with existing tumor and matched normal (T/N) sequencing data from dogs with cancer. We will use this data to improve the annotation of the T-cell receptor genes and identify breed-specific alleles. This will benefit immunotherapy studies as well as studies of T-cell lymphomas and how specific clonally expanded TCR rearrangements associate with somatic alterations. 

 Canine clinical trials The high frequency of dogs affected by diseases, which share a similar pathogenesis to their human homologue means that for the last decade clinical trials have been performed in dogs to alleviate the large gap between rodent models and human clinical trials [33]. This is also the case in cancer therapy were many treatments have been studied in dogs with the view to improve treatments for humans as well as dogs. Recently even trials including immunotherapy, oncolytic viral therapy and gene therapy for certain canine cancer types have been performed as comparative models for human trials [33-37]. Though toxicity profiles, drug metabolism and side effects can be evaluated in dog models, evaluation of the efficacy of the drug and its translation to human disease is often limited by lack of comparative tumor phenotypes, a problem which is addressed in this application. 

 ##INNOVATION 

 To develop the dog as a model for human cancers, we will work actively on multiple fronts: a) a better canine genome, b) a better understanding and inventory of canine immune genes and copy number variation, c) development of a Scandinavian Oncology Consortium for sample collection from well phenotyped patients and 

 clinical trials that can work together with US trial consortium and d) molecular profiling and matching of canine tumors to human cancers. 

 We plan to use the most promising novel techniques for genome sequencing, combining PacBio, BioNano, Chromium sequencing and HiC to generate high base quality and structurally sound long-range assemblies to create an improved canine reference CanFam4.0 genome. Only a few mammalian species, including human, gorilla, and goat, have been subjected to such in-depth scrutiny [38-40]. We also plan to use chromium on an additional twenty dogs across ten breeds to look comprehensively, for the first time, at immune-gene family differences across breeds and individuals. While the CanFam4.0 from a German shepherd dog (GSD) will have a platinum reference sequence, the sequencing of twenty dogs using the Chromium System will allow the detection and presentation of more complex polymorphisms across breeds and across the canine genome. This resource will be novel in its ability to describe the genome of many dogs in multiple breeds. 

 While my lab and our collaborators have worked through the years to determine both the canine genome sequence and its in-depth annotation, this work is based on a reference genome that is now outdated. Older techniques did not allow for the targeting of complex gene families such as the full MHC (canine DLA) and T-cell receptor regions. Using novel long-read sequencing technologies (PacBio and Chromium) and comparisons across dog breeds, we will be able to resolve regions such as the MHC and T-cell receptor regions which are complicated by the high gene density, the polymorphism between individuals, as well as complex linkage disequilibrium. Ovine and bovine MHC regions have partially inverted gene order compared to human [41]. Recently, the canine CD1 locus harboring genes encoding dendritic cell antigen-presenting molecule was sequenced using PacBio SMRT technology [42]. This analysis revealed that two genes previously believed to be allelic variants of the same gene were in fact separate genes located in tandem [42]. SMRT sequencing of the canine MHC region and T-cell receptor to identify breed-specific alleles has not previously been performed, and would greatly enhance the understanding and annotation of the region. 

 The UCSC TrackHub and NCIP are both novel ways to interactively display and share genetic and genomics data. We will use both of these tools to disseminate and make our data publically available. In addition to the data generated by us, we will collect additional publicly-available canine datasets for genome annotation and genetic variation in order to create the largest available database of canine genome annotation and genetic variation. In humans, resources such as ExAC show annotations across genes where variants are tolerated or not. We plan to make a similar catalog for the canine gene set, focusing on breeds predisposed to cancer and cataloging/describing germ-line variants (SNPs, small indels and copy number variants). In parallel, we will build a catalog of somatic variants identified in the different canine cancers. 

 We propose to develop comparative molecular phenotyping of three cancers: breast cancer, lymphoma and osteosarcoma, where dogs represent great potential models for the parallel human disease. 

 For the first time, we will use state-of the art tumor/normal sequencing and expression profiling to generate molecular profiles and develop gene panels for identifying which canine patients match which specific human subtypes of breast cancer, lymphoma, and osteosarcoma, respectively. In addition, we will enrich these expression profiles by comparing them with canine germ-line risk factors and tumor mutations found in the corresponding dogs. We will further enhance the comparative value of the dog model by including both purebred dogs and regular mixed breed family dogs. We will work closely with human and canine cancer experts on breast cancer, lymphoma and osteosarcoma to ensure state of the art matching of molecular phenotypes. 

 The Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium proposed in this application is formed to ensure long-term sampling of canine cancer tissue with standardized phenotypic descriptions by oncology specialists and clinical outcome data, to be shared with any collaborating lab. In addition, it will serve as a basis to communicate research findings to the veterinary community and identify canine patient groups appropriate for relevant studies. It creates a multi-disciplinary canine oncology hub in Scandinavia and will use modern techniques such as online meetings with screen sharing to discuss progression and enhance outcome. The positioning in Scandinavia is particularly advantageous for studying mammary tumors due to the low spaying rate. 

 ##APPROACH 

 ###Overview of the team and approach: 

 Uppsala canine genetics group: The canine genetics group in Uppsala (Uppsala University (UU) and Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SLU)) is a multi-disciplinary team led by professor Kerstin Lindblad-Toh. The group works in the forefront of canine genetics including six cancer types (mammary tumors, lymphoma, osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, mast cell tumors, and glioma: GWAS results have been published for all six cancers in the past several years with the PI as senior author). Dr. Lindblad-Toh led the original sequencing and analysis of the canine genome, the development of multiple SNP arrays and has played a leadership role within the canine genetics community including on the European LUPA project. In addition, Dr. Lindblad-Toh has led a large number of mammalian and vertebrate genome projects, many of which have contributed to the annotation and understanding of the functional elements in the human and other vertebrate genomes. Dr. Lindblad-Toh also has a background in human genetics. 

 The mixed expertise of the team covers both clinical aspects of complex disease in dogs as well as molecular and genetic aspects of disease analysis: Maja Louise Arendt is an experienced researcher in genetics, gene therapy and molecular oncology. She is also a veterinarian by training and will complete her European Residency in Oncology in 2018. Ingegerd Elvers is an experienced researcher in genetics and molecular oncology. She has extensive experience in analyzing RNA and DNA sequencing data from matched tumor/normal tissue and a strong background in studying DNA repair mechanisms and oncogenesis. Previous and current cancer work has focused heavily on GWAS studies and validation, but also included WGS, matched tumor/normal exome sequencing and RNA sequencing. Collaborators also include Göran Andersson, SLU, professor in molecular genetics and with experience in immunophenotyping and sequencing of the MHC coding regions in a number of species and Christophe Hitte, CNRS, France who has strong experience in genome annotation and analysis of both coding and non-coding transcriptional profiling. 

 The recently initiated Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium includes collaborators from all three Scandinavian veterinary universities (Lars Moe and Frode Lingaas, Norwegian School of Veterinary Sciences, Henrik Rönnberg, SLU and Annemarie Kristensen, University of Copenhagen) as well as Helsinki University (Hannes Lohi) and multiple veterinarians from major private veterinary hospitals (AniCura and Evidensia). The consortium is in its early phase with a first meeting of ~20 participants on May 18, 2017, and a second meeting December 11 th , 2017. We are excited that we are capturing clinics across Scandinavia and Finland. 80 MT and 90 OSA samples for genotyping/sequencing have been shared within the Scandinavian consortium in the past six months. We and US collaborators have also received >200 CCOGC OSA samples recently. 

 In addition, we have international collaborators offering expertise in canine and human cancer: Anne Avery, CSU, is a specialist in canine lymphoma and immune genes and Cheryl London, Tufts U and The Ohio State University and Jaime Modiano, U. Minn are experts in canine osteosarcoma, while Matthew Breen, NCSU is an expert in copy number aberration detection in canine cancer. Viktor Adalsteinsson, Broad Institute will collaborate on the analysis of cfDNA and comparison to human breast cancer data. 

 Timeline: 

 Year 1: Generation of a CanFam4.0 platinum genome using PacBio, Chromium, BioNano and HiC. Chromium sequencing of 20 chromium genomes from 10 breeds. Organization of Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium infrastructure, third and fourth meeting and web page. Canine cancer patient recruitment, phenotyping and collection of samples for tumor/normal sequencing and RNA sequencing. Analysis of existing T/N WES data to identify different subtypes with varying molecular profiles. 

 Year 2: Structural variation detection, annotation and gene family analysis and construction of CanFam4.0 TrackHub. Comparison of T/N data, RNA-Seq data and already identified germ-line risk factors. Comparison of canine and human data and comparison between T/N sequencing, RNA sequencing and identified germline risk factors. Continued expansion of the Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium meetings. Collection of periodic liquid biopsies from mammary tumor cases (mostly malignant, but with some benign as controls). 

 Year 3: Continued work on genome annotation, analysis of additional T/N WGS samples and RNA-Seq based on consortium sample collection and results from previous years. Continued collection of periodic liquid biopsies from mammary tumor cases and WGS of these samples. Share data with The National Cancer Institute Oncology Models Forum (NCI OMF). 

 Year 4: Final analysis, summary of results and validation of data. This year will also act as a buffer for any delays occurring in the previous years. Publication of results in scientific journals and sharing of research data. Organization of Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium meeting. 

 BACKGROUND AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS Current canine genome assembly and TrackHub. The current genome assembly CanFam3.1 was built in 2005 by my group using a Sanger shotgun approach and was subsequently improved using a targeted gap filling and annotation with RNA-Seq in 2014 [43]. It is hosted on the UCSC browser both as a standard genome browser and as a TrackHub where we are adding novel annotations based on cancer variant discovery and RNA-seq data. While of high quality for its age (N50 contig size of 180kb), it has lower contiguity than the novel SMRT genomes produced using PacBio combined with additional mapping methods. Long-range contiguity is essential when determining haplotype phase, resolving complex structural rearrangements and gene family expansions or contractions, and also for evaluating regions of high heterozygosity or GC rich regions. In CanFam3.1 the canine MHC region, interferon cluster, and other immune gene families are more fragmented than the rest of the genome. In addition, 83Mb (4%) of the current genome assembly has been sequenced but not mapped, suggesting sequence with more complexity or lower sequencing coverage. 

 Together with collaborators we recently conducted a pilot study to evaluate how much sequence is missing from the CanFam3.1 assembly. We aligned Illumina short reads from 10 individuals (8 dogs from four breeds and 2 wolves) to the CanFam3.1 assembly. For each individual ~1 million reads were unplaced, suggesting that roughly 1% of the genome is missing or present in high-complexity regions. Unmapped reads were extracted and k-mers counted and the individuals clustered resulting in five clusters with the wolves furthest from the others. This suggest that the unmapped reads partly contain regions of the genome that are present in some breeds/dogs but not others and therefore implying that the use of multiple dogs with long-range contiguity across complex regions would be advantageous in creating an improved canine genome assembly. We then investigated the variant content of unmapped read using the same whole genome sequences from 10 individuals. We used discoSNP an alignment-free tool to call variants through de novo assembly approach. We identified more than 4 million SNPs per sample from which ~83% are also detected using standard reads mapping approach that relies on the current dog reference genome and variant caller (GATK). A total of ~578,000 were new SNPs not detected from standard protocols of aligning sequence reads onto the dog reference genome. From the newly discovery SNPs, ~500,000 mapped on assembled chromosomes (the reads don’t map but the variants in context do – likely reflecting complex regions of the genome) and 78,000 remained unmapped indicating that variant discovery cannot be properly and fully investigated using the current dog assembly. These variants could be real polymorphism not in CanFam3.1 or duplicated regions with some variation, highlighting the wealth of information not present in the current canine genome reference. 

 While the proposed new platinum assembly will have its base in PacBio SMRT, we plan to use Chromium sequencing as a cheaper alternative for high-contiguity assemblies from multiple breeds. To assess the performance of Chromium we generated a 50x Chromium 10X assembly from the GSD we plan to use for the PacBio assembly. The preliminary assembly size was 2.28Gb with a scaffold N50 = 9.98Mb. Comparison of this assembly to the CanFam3.1 showed that 96% of the sequence was shared, whereas the Chromium assembly contained 4,936 sequences containing 107Mb (4.7%) not seen in CanFam3.1. Of the 83 Mb of sequence residing on the unmapped chromosome of CanFam3.1, 58% mapped to larger Chromium contigs. 

 Genome-wide association mapping and functional analysis of canine mammary tumors. Using the Illumina 170K canine HD SNP array [44], we have performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 332 ESS (188 cases, 144 controls) [45]. EMMAX software [46] was used to calculate association p-values corrected for stratification and cryptic relatedness using mixed model statistics. Eight SNPs, located in three genomic regions, show genome-wide significant p-values. These three top associated loci explain 28.1±10.0% of the phenotypic variation. In addition to the associated regions, an almost completely fixed region was identified on chromosome 30. Following resequencing and further fine-mapping, multiple associated haplotypes on chromosome 11 spanning the CDK5RAP2 gene and parts of the MEGF9 gene and a small gene desert between CDK5RAP2 and DBC1 were identified. The most strongly associated SNP is located within a small gene desert upstream of the CDK5RAP2 gene. The risk allele disrupts a transcription factor binding motif for PNR/NR2E3, which is an orphan nuclear hormone receptor. It is a regulator of the estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) in ER positive breast cancer cells and interleukin 13Ra2 in ER negative breast cancer cells, regulating tumor growth, cell migration and metastasis [47, 48]. 

 In addition to the published GWA for ESS [45] we are in the process of analyzing GWA datasets from additional breeds including cocker spaniels, German shepherds and boxers as well as additional ESS. 

 Genome-wide association mapping and functional analysis of lymphoma. Using the Illumina 170K canine HD SNP array, we have performed a GWAS of B-cell lymphoma cases and controls among Golden retrievers identifying two predisposing loci that are shared with hemangiosarcoma [49]. Investigation of gene expression changes in B-cell lymphomas from individuals with risk or non-risk haplotypes identified significant changes in genes associated with immune cell function. In addition, a GWAS in the same breed studying T-zone lymphoma cases and controls identified two predisposing loci that are not shared with other T-cell lymphoma subtypes (unpublished data with collaborator Anne Avery, Colorado State University). 

 Genome-wide association mapping and functional analysis of osteosarcoma. Using the same Illumina 170K canine HD SNP array as above we investigated the genetic predisposition to osteosarcoma in three different breeds. We identified 33 associated loci, most of which were specific to the different breeds, but implying genes in shared pathways [2]. Detailed analysis of the top Greyhound locus near CDKN2A/B identified the causative SNP and showed that it alters a transcription factor binding site. The risk variant was fixed in the two other breeds investigated. Five additional breeds are currently in GWAS genotyping. 

 T/N analysis of lymphoma. Using an exome array developed by my group, we set out to study tumor mutations in canine B- and T-cell lymphoma in three breeds with differential predisposition [50]. In the two breeds with B-cell lymphoma, we saw strong similarities between golden retrievers and cocker spaniels, with typical mutations in POT1 (17% of all cases), FBXW7 (25%), and TRAF3 and/or MAP3K14 (28%). 40% of the FBXW7 mutations occur in a specific codon; the corresponding codon is recurrently mutated in human cancer. In contrast, little overlap was seen in the mutated genes in the two T-cell lymphoma predisposed breeds, boxers and golden retrievers. They only share one of their 27 significantly mutated genes. Boxers, who develop aggressive T-cell lymphomas, are typically mutated in the PTEN-mTOR pathway. T-cell lymphomas in golden retrievers are often less aggressive and the studied tumors typically show mutations in genes involved in cellular metabolism. Some overlap was seen between the significantly mutated genes in golden retrievers with B- and T-cell lymphoma. We identified genes with known involvement in human lymphoma and leukemia, genes implicated in other human cancers, as well as novel genes that could allow new therapeutic targets. 

 T/N analysis of osteosarcoma. A similar analysis of T/N WES data from three breeds with osteosarcoma is currently ongoing. Preliminary data point to strong similarities with human osteosarcoma. The most frequently mutated gene, TP53, showed mutations in ~60% of all dogs. Copy number detection by VarScan2 [51] and GISTIC2 [52] showed extensive somatic copy number aberrations (SCNAs) across all three breed. Both TP53 mutations and large numbers of SCNAs are hallmarks of human osteosarcoma. In addition, as a novel OSA finding, SETD2 was mutated in ~21% of dog samples (golden retriever 32% (n=22), Rottweiler 19% (n=21) and greyhound 13% (n=23)) and showed a variety of mutation types (frameshift, nonsense, splice and missense). The SETD2 gene encodes a histone methyltransferase and has been implicated as a tumor suppressor gene in a number of cancers [53, 54]. Intriguingly, analysis of mutational signatures [55] identified three signatures at different frequencies across breeds. They included Cosmic 1, often related to aging, Cosmic 17 and a novel signature seen more frequently in tumors from golden retrievers. 

 Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium. We have formed an initial Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium with >20 participants across Scandinavia and Finland. Two meetings have been held in 2017 and several hundred samples have been shared so far. We have also connected to the Clinical Translational Science Award (CTSA) One Health Alliance (COHA) through Co-Applicant Dr. Cheryl London. 

 Specific Aim 1. CanFam4.0 – a novel platinum canine genome and a catalog of germ-line copy number variation. 

 Rationale: Since the first canine genome in 2004, additional genome sequencing and expression studies have been performed to improve the genome and its annotation. Still, little progress has been made on resolving complex regions of the genome including gene families or highly repetitive sequences. These regions include several immune gene regions such as the DLA region (canine MHC) as well as the T-cell receptor genes. Both of these are important for how antigens are presented and recognized and how immune responses are generated to detect cancer versus tolerating normal self. To extend the translational use of dogs for cancer immunotherapy studies it is important to understand the similarities and differences of immune gene regions between humans and dogs and between different dogs (breeds). Using novel long read sequencing technologies it is now possible to generate much more contiguous genome assemblies, both as a single reference assembly and to characterize the large-scale variation of the canine landscape in many breeds. 

 CanFam4.0 - Platinum reference genome assembly. A 12 years old healthy German shepherd dog (GSD) living near Uppsala has donated blood for all the techniques used to generate the platinum assembly. We selected a GSD as this breed is predisposed to multiple diseases, including mammary tumors. The particular dog was selected as it is a 12-year old intact healthy female, thus constituting a ‘neutral reference’. The blood samples were collected by a veterinarian at Uppsala Veterinary Hospital and immediately transferred to the SciLifeLab Genomics platform at Uppsala University where the blood was taken care of to allow the collection of really high molecular weight DNA (i.e. using agarose plugs) for analysis with long read technologies. When making libraries we will use extra high-molecular weight DNA. 

| A combination of four technologies will be applied: 75x single-molecule real-time sequencing (PacBio RSII, |                                                              |
| ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Genomics platform at SciLifeLab),                            | 50x Chromium paired-end sequencing (Illumina HiSeq, SciLifeLab), and Hi- |
| C sequencing (Dovetail Genomics, Inc.) as well as optical mapping (using BioNano Genomics Irys, |                                                              |
| SciLifeLab). Assembly of these complementary data types will proceed in a stepwise fashion, producing |                                                              |
| progressively improved assemblies. The initial assembly of the PacBio data alone (generated using the |                                                              |
| FALCON assembler, Quiver and Falcon Unzip to phase the data into haplotypes) is expected to result in a |                                                              |
| contig N50 (half the sequence resides in contigs this size or larger) of many Megabase size. The Chromium |                                                              |
| sequence will be used to error correct the PacBio contigs/haplotypes (primarily to remove false indels) and the |                                                              |
| PacBio will then be scaffolded using BioNano optical mapping data. Finally, the resulting scaffolds will be |                                                              |
| clustered using Hi-C data into chromosome-scale scaffolds.   |                                                              |

 Quality control of the platinum genome will be performed on both a local and global level. The Hi-C data will be used to validate the long-range contiguity within the assembly, whereas the Chromium data will be used at the read level. All Chromium reads will be aligned against the genome sequence and the fraction of reads not mapped will be tallied. The unmapped reads will be repeat masked and compared to the human, mouse and goat genomes. This will allow us to estimate the completeness of the assembly and what portions might be missing. 

 In depth analysis of large-scale variation from additional breeds: To allow detection and display of largescale genomic variation, we will perform Chromium sequencing from twenty dogs representing 10 breeds that get mammary tumors (English springer spaniel, cocker spaniel, boxer and GSD), other cancers (golden retriever, Rottweiler, Leonberger, great Danes) as well as breeds with little cancer (West Highland white terrier, giant Schnauzer). For each of the cancer breeds one case & one control will be sequenced. 50-60x Chromium data will be generated per individual and will be assembled and examined on the haplotype level. The Chromium technology combines Illumina short read accuracy with long-range contiguity, generating contigs spanning across gene families at a more reasonable price than PacBio sequencing. These twenty genomes will be compared to the CanFam4.0 and the Chromium GSD genome to identify SNPs/indels but more importantly to perform careful analysis of copy number variation including immune gene clusters. Based on the variation detected across the 20 Chromium genomes, we will identify gene family variation and will design potential PCR based, targeted long-read resequencing assays that can be used to genotype the immune gene families and other copy number variation across many dogs. We will generate a catalog of copy number variations, available on the TrackHub, showing differences between breeds. 

 Potential pitfalls and alternative solutions: Potential pitfalls include lower quality DNA, which would result in lower long-range contiguity of assemblies. To avoid this, we will be very careful when taking blood samples to see that these can be taken care of as quickly as possible (recent collection from a 12-year old GSD went well). For all long-range technologies (including Chromium) we will start with high molecular weight DNA. If for some reason the DNA quality is not as good as expected, new samples will be collected and processed. If other canine PacBio assemblies were to become available before our CanFam4.0 platinum genome, we would still generate our assembly as planned, and then use the other long-range canine assemblies to compare and examine diversity across important gene families in the multiple available platinum assemblies. 

 Specific Aim 2. Detailed gene and variant annotation of the CanFam4.0 assembly including immune genes. 

 Rationale: The genome assembly is only as useful as the amount of information it contains. For the CanFam4.0 genome sequence to be useful for disease gene mapping and for analysis of somatic tumor mutations we need a comprehensive gene annotation, but also as much information as possible about the regulatory potential of the >5% of the genome that is under functional constraint. We will therefore map and display both variation and gene data on the genome assembly using our own data (RNA–seq and WGS from many dog breeds) as well as publically available data. We will generate a new TrackHub on the UCSC browser and display both genes and variation (SNPs, indels and large-scale copy number variation). 

 Annotating genomic variation across >140 breeds: The existing, publically available collection of >500 canine short-read genomes (typically Illumina) from 140 breeds, as well as the large-scale variants detected in the 20 Chromium assemblies in Aim 1, will be mapped to the CanFam4.0 platinum genome. This will allow us to generate a catalog of small and large-scale coding and non-coding variants from >140 breeds. 

 Gene annotation of CanFam4.0 platinum genome: To carefully annotate the platinum genome and especially the genes in the MHC/DLA regions we will use the in progress in depth RNA–seq data from the Vertebrate Genomics group at the Broad Institute (R-24 submitted by KLT). This includes 30 tissues, including B-cells, T-cells, monocytes, bone marrow and lymph nodes as well as primary cell cultures including lymphocytes and bone marrow derived stem cells. We will also collect and sequence RNA from >30 tissues from the GSD dog used for the new reference genome. We will also take immune cells (from blood) from the CanFam4.0 platinum genome GSD individual. We will perform RNA-Seq, ATAC–seq and HiC (same as above) to allow us to annotate open chromatin and regulatory proximities in immune cells. We will map the RNA-seq transcripts to the platinum CanFam4.0 genome and will specifically look for gene duplications and pseudogenes as well as polymorphisms within the transcripts. LincRNAs and miRNAs identified previously [56] will also be mapped to the CanFam4.0 genome. All genes will be compared to the human, mouse and goat genomes, and copy number variants will be recorded. 

 Annotations of variants: Metrics of the pathogenesis for each of the coding variants will be generated using SNPEff, while non-coding variants will be assessed using evolutionary constraint from our ongoing 200 mammals project. The 200 mammals project will detect single base resolution constraint across placental mammals including the dog. This resource will be similar to the cancer variation resource [57] building on data from ExAC [58] and will generate a “panel of normal variation” that can be used for identifying breed-specific, potentially predisposing variants as well as normal germ-line variation in canine tumor/normal sequencing of any cancer. 

 CanFam4.0 display in Genome Browser and on TrackHub together with variation and gene annotation: CanFam4.0 will be displayed as a standard genome sequence on UCSC. In addition, we will generate a TrackHub, where we can add in any type of information in specific tracks. We will display SNPs, indels and CNVs together with coding and non-coding gene annotation as well as 200 mammals constraint information. 

 Potential pitfalls and alternative solutions: When annotating the CanFam4.0 assembly some RNA-seq or variation data obtained earlier may reside outside the novel assembly. If this is the case, despite a significantly more complete reference genome, we will count and describe the genes and variants outside the novel assembly. We will need to work with UCSC to allow the most effective display of copy number variants and other complex variants. If we are not able to show alternative versions of complex regions on the Track Hub, we will work with UCSC to add this information to the regular browser. 

 Specific Aim 3. Define comparable molecular phenotypes for lymphoma, osteosarcoma, and breast cancer and collect longitudinal samples for mammary tumor evolution analysis. 

 Rationale: Developing the dog as a model for human cancer remains an underutilized resource. We will use existing T/N WES to compare breeds and histopathological subtypes for lymphoma, osteosarcoma, and breast cancer. We will use this to select and prioritize existing and prospective T/N samples for RNA sequencing as well as tumor and normal WGS. We will use this to identify comparable molecular subgroups for all three cancers. We will organize a Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium to strengthen the collaboration between veterinarians and researchers and create a platform for recruitment, phenotyping and collection of canine cancer samples with a focus on mammary tumors. We will also connect this consortium to a similar effort in the US. We will use the consortium to select dogs with malignant mammary tumors and resample plasma every month for cfDNA sequencing as a proxy for tumor mutations [59]. This will allow us to study tumor evolution and develop infrastructure necessary for performing clinical trials in the future. 

 ##Experimental Approach: 

 ###Sample collection strategies and sample preparation: 

 We have sequenced and analyzed T/N WES data for B-cell (2 breeds) and T-cell (2 breeds) lymphoma and osteosarcoma (3 breeds), and T/N WES for mammary tumors is under way (3 breeds + additional samples). B-cell lymphomas from 2 breeds are remarkably similar whereas T-cell lymphomas from 2 breeds exhibit mutations in unrelated pathways [50]. For osteosarcoma, the same pathways are mutated across breeds but mutational load correlates with breed predisposition (manuscript submitted). We will perform RNA-Seq and WGS to evaluate how molecular subtypes correlate with human cancer subtypes. Lymphoma samples will be selected based on histological subtype and breed. Osteosarcoma samples with known recurrence outcome from three breeds will be prioritized to allow for analysis of expression patterns in different genetic backgrounds. Mammary tumor WES (underway) will be analyzed before new samples are selected for sequencing. Veterinary oncologists and pathologists will be consulted for all samples. For many breeds in each cancer we have performed GWAS which allows correlation of germ-line and somatic variants. 

 Throughout the life of the project – using the newly formed consortium described below and other collaborators – we will collect tumor and matched normal tissue from all dogs with mammary tumors, all major lymphoma subtypes, and osteosarcomas with known outcome. We currently have around 80 mammary tumors and 30 lymphomas and we have access to 200 osteosarcomas (many from CCOGC). We will sequence (WGS and RNA-Seq) and analyze ~40 T/N pairs each year, focusing on one of the three target cancers each year. At least 10 samples will be sequenced for each breed/subtype as this number is sufficient to identify significantly mutated genes [50]. We will evaluate gene expression patterns, analyze the mutational spectrum in dog breeds predisposed to multiple cancers, and correlate significantly mutated genes with clinical outcome. We will extract both DNA and RNA from RNA-later preserved tumor tissue using the All-Prep RNA/DNA extraction kit. DNA and RNA quality will be evaluated using the Agilent tape station. We will use DNA extracted from peripheral blood to represent germ-line variance for each dog. 

 We will also collect plasma for monthly sampling of select dogs with mammary tumors. These dogs will be recruited during year 1-2 and sampled for 18 months for cell-free DNA sequencing. Samples will be collected in Streck Cell-Free DNA blood collection tubes. 

 RNA-Seq for expression analysis: RNA samples from tumor tissue collected as described above from the key breeds and a mix of breeds, will be sent for polyA selected strand specific RNA-Seq library preparation at the SciLifeLab Sequencing Platform and subsequent sequencing on Illumina HiSeq 2500 to allow for at least 50x coverage of the transcriptome. MicroRNAs and lincRNAs will also be sequenced. The RNA sequencing data will be mapped to the canine reference genome CanFam4.0 using STAR [60]. Differential expression between tumor types will be assessed using CuffDiff and cummeRbund [61] and edgeR [62]. Genes differentially expressed between tumors with a specific histopathological diagnosis or between tumors from different breeds will be confirmed using rtPCR on cDNA. Pathway analysis will be performed, using DAVID [63] and PathwAX [64] to detect pathways that are alternatively expressed in different tumors. Both breed-based and histology-based comparisons will be performed. 

 Tumor/normal analysis: T/N WGS data will be mapped to the canine reference genome CanFam4.0 using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner [65], and duplicates will be marked using Picard (broadinstitute.github.io/picard/). Subsequent base quality recalibration and indel realignment will be performed with the genome analysis toolkit (GATK, [66]). Finally variant discovery will be performed using muTect2 [67, 68] inputting a panel of normal variants previously detected across breeds and cancers ([50]), and significantly mutated genes will be identified using Genome MuSiC [69]. Copy number aberrations will be identified using VarScan2 [70] and analyzed using GISTIC2 [52]. Other structural variation in tumor and normal genomes will be assessed using a combination of tools using different types of information (split reads, discordant read pairs, read count) and specialized for detecting genomic rearrangement of different sizes: Lumpy [71], Delly [72], Pindel [73, 74], and SVDetect [75]. All have successfully been used to analyze cancer genomes. Similarities and differences of mutated genes, copy number aberrations and other SVs, and specific mutations in key genes will be compared among all the individuals as well as between breeds. The catalog of detected canine tumor mutations will be compared to tumor mutations identified in human breast cancer studies [76]. For each dog we will also compare germ-line and somatic mutations and copy number aberrations. Here utilizing the CanFam4.0 and the generated catalogs of germ-line variation including CNVs will be important. 

 Detection of mutational signatures: We will also examine the mutational signature landscape for the somatic mutations identified across the tumor genome. For mutational signatures, we use the Bayesian non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) methodology developed at the Broad Institute [77], which we have successfully applied to WES of 66 canine OSA T/N pairs. For other canine cancers, we have found several of the signatures observed in human cancers (i.e. Cosmic 1 related to aging) [55, 78], but also a novel signature that we are currently exploring. We have detected both breed-specific and cancer-specific signatures (Ingegerd Elvers unpublished data). 

 Dissection of molecular phenotypes: We will evaluate molecular phenotypes by performing unsupervised clustering of differentially expressed genes across tumors from the same cancer, and determining if there are any recurrent patterns. Using significantly mutated genes and SCNAs and other SVs from T/N WGS, we will evaluate whether the identified subgroups are associated with breeds or location/histological subtype or mutations in specific pathways or mutations in recurrent combinations of genes. This analysis will be performed at the beginning of the project with the current T/N WES datasets, and later on with the T/N WGS data generated as part of this project. 

 Comparison to human cancer: We plan to compare the molecular profiles identified in each of our tumor types with existing human data, thereby evaluating which molecular profiles the canine models represent. Significantly mutated genes, and their mutations as well as affected pathways will be compared with existing human data for each tumor type. We will utilize data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, https://tcgadata.nci.nih.gov/docs/publications/tcga/, now served at Genomic Data Commons: https://gdc.cancer.gov) which reports on >1000 breast cancer patients, ~ 380 osteosarcoma patients. In addition, we will use data from the COSMIC database (containing data from thousands of tumors of each type). We will perform clustering to see if similar patient subgroups are shared between the two species. Based on existing canine tumor expression data we expect overlaps with human subtypes of the same cancer, but we will also look for canine models for different human cancers (similar to how canine TCC commonly display BRAF mutations, making them a better model for human BRAF mutated cancers than human TCC [79]. Such models are relevant since for example many but not all BRAF mutated cancers respond to the same drugs [80]). We will look for new and existing therapeutic targets within our datasets to evaluate the suitability for each tumor subtype for clinical trials. We will share our canine cancer data both on the UCSC Track Hub (where specific mutations, affected gene and eQTLs can be visualized) as well as in the NCIP forum. 

 Consortium building: We have initiated a network including key people working at Scandinavian veterinary schools as well as private clinics (Evidensia and AniCura) in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Finland. We have already had an initial meeting (5/18/17) with ~20 key people from the four countries. With the requested funding we are hoping to organize a bi-annual Scandinavian veterinary oncology meeting for all interested veterinarians and researchers and for key human cancer specialists. By also collaborating with Anne Avery, Jaime Modiano, Matthew Breen, Cheryl London, and the US Clinical Translational Science Award (CTSA) One Health Alliance (COHA), we will expand the breadth of the consortium to include not only mammary tumors but also osteosarcoma and lymphoma, and include American samples and researchers. 

 Web presence and sample collection: We will build a website for the consortium where pet owners can find veterinarians or researchers in their vicinity that can recruit dogs to participate in the proposed research studies and later in clinical trials. Researchers will be able to share information on acquired samples to promote collaborations across countries. We will ask veterinarians to record follow-up information on the enrolled dogs so that we can follow clinical progression. 

 These tools will be synchronized with those currently being developed by the Clinical Translational Science Award (CTSA) One Health Alliance (COHA), comprised of US veterinary schools partnered with medical and other colleagues through an NIH CTSA. COHA currently consists of 13 academic centers working together to broaden outreach, optimize clinical trial platforms, enhance education and standardize biobanking within the veterinary community. Dr. London is Chair of the Clinical Trials Subcommittee that is driving synchronization of trial practices across the COHA network. Specifically, this group has recently developed a veterinary Good Clinical Practice training module for certification within the profession, published guidelines with respect to QA/QC of translational trial data [81]. Additionally, the committee has instituted training across the COHA network, in the use of REDCap a web based electronic data platform that is used to capture clinical trial data in a standardized format. One standard presently gaining traction within the human research community is the implementation and deployment of a Common Data Model (CDM) based on the Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) data schema, forming a shared data layer in which hospitals and clinics can convert and import their operational patient care record data into a homogenous data layer to support multi-institution research. [82-86] To facilitate the implementation of multi-center translational trials in natural models of disease, COHA is in the process of developing and implementing a veterinary-adapted version of this platform 

 (OMOP V5+). In summary, the tools and platforms generated through the COHA efforts led by Dr. London will be leveraged to facilitate the development of the proposed trials consortium in Europe and permit synchronization with ongoing efforts in the US, the ultimate goal of creating a coordinated multi-national network driving comparative and translational medicine. 

 Longitudinal cfDNA sampling to examine tumor evolution: We will select 8 malignant and 2 benign mammary tumors and perform repeat cell-free DNA sampling every month for 18 months after the dogs’ surgery, utilizing their faster progression compared to human breast cancer (LOS Adalsteinsson). These samples will be subjected to 0.1x whole genome coverage (ULP-WGS) for detection of the cell free tumor DNA fraction based on the CNAs detected using ichorCNA [59]. If tumor DNA constitutes >10% of total cfDNA the samples will be submitted to WES to detect coding tumor mutations. cfDNA has been previously successfully studied in canine mammary tumors [87]. A whole-body CT scan will be performed after 9 months. This pilot dataset will allow us to ask several questions: Can we detect cell free DNA in plasma from mammary tumors? Are the amounts of cfDNA stable over time? Is cfDNA also present in benign samples? What is the progressive evolution of tumor mutations in these malignant samples? Is there a correlation with outcome? 

 Potential pitfalls and alternative solutions: Sample collection. The majority of samples have already been collected, using standardized reagents to ensure RNA preservation. The consortium has already started to meet and develop common protocols for sample collection. Great care will be taken in extracting RNA from tissues to preserve RNA quality, and this factor will be monitored throughout the process to remove low-quality samples. The majority of previously collected canine samples lack information on treatment and survival, so this aspect cannot be matched to human data. However, as we collect samples within the SVOC we will collect clinical follow-up going forward. Molecular subtypes. RNA mutations will be validated using WGS data. Multiple software will be used and compared for pathway analysis (IPA, DAVID). cfDNA sequencing. If cfDNA levels are insufficient during the first 3 months in the first 3 dogs, focus will be shifted to metastatic patients. 

 ##CONCLUSION. 

 We plan to improve the dog as a cancer model by (a) specifically improving the use of mammary tumors as a model for human breast cancer, and (b) improving the canine reference genome with special attention to the annotation of DLA and other key immune gene families. We will evaluate different molecular and genetic aspects of canine mammary tumors to allow the classification into comparative human subtypes. The goal is to allow for better translational value of this model in clinical trials. We aim to take advantage of the relatively homologous genome structure within individual dog breeds to investigate the connection between RNA expression, somatic mutations and germ-line risk factors, a feature which is difficult in humans due to their more diverse genetic variation. To support this work as well as the translational studies of various other canine cancers, we plan to organize a Scandinavian Veterinary Oncology Consortium. Through this, we will assemble a platform to share research findings quickly, to enable effective cancer sample collection as well as to have an organization for clinical trials in the future. In addition, we plan to generate a platinum reference genome, CanFam4.0 including careful annotation of the DLA and other key immune gene families. We hypothesize that this information can be of great value for finding targets for immunotherapy, for understanding cell-of-origin in lymphomas, and for evaluating genetic risk factors predisposing to cancer. 